---
sidebar_position: 1.5
---

# Ethical values

:::info

These values are written in grey, contributors will be fine without ever reading
them. They do not serve as a purity test and we do not ask for contributors
themselves to align to the values. What is important is actions within the
context of the project and serious conflicts of interest. Our work will
naturally align with them if the work is true to Draupnir's community focus.
This document reinforces Draupnir's community focus and also acts as a deterrent
and canary.

:::

Our society provides a great incentive for people to build systems and
organisations that exert top down control. It takes effort to avoid them. It is
important for these values to be expressed so that the project is protected from
a hostile takeover. These values are at the essence of Draupnir, and the project
would not be the same without them.

## Liberation

The Draupnir project only exists as a small part of an eternal struggle to fight
against oppression and authoritarianism in any form, and in all appearances.

Draupnir will not work with or legitimise any entity that enforces arbitrary
detention, terrorizes communities, or persecutes minorities.

Draupnir is blind to the law when liberation is concerned. What is legal is not
what is right. Breaking power that is used by authoritarians will always be more
important than the continuance of any project.

## Empowerment

We build pathways for others to follow us through as equals. We reject systems
that allow parties to control or extract from others.

## Accountability

Draupnir belongs to its contributors and the communities it serves. Decisions
about direction, funding, and governance are made transparently and with
accountability to those affected. Opaque authority and influence must be
actively and continuously brought into transparency in any form in which they
present themselves.

## Integrity

Contributions to Draupnir are made in confidence of these values. Should any
contributor's actions clearly conflict with these values, it is expected that
their contribution will end.
